# Capstone Project 

## Applying NLP to predict companies’ ESG Readiness Score using Quarterly Earnings Transcripts, Press release and News Articles


Sustainability investment based on Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) factors has become mainstream and is now a key component of many investment strategies. However, the wide range of ESG factors, the complexity of comparing those factors between different companies and the lack of standardization in reporting and disclosure poses a challenge in predicting a company’s ESG readiness score.   The purpose of this research is to apply Natural Language Processing to capture the ESG factors in earning call transcripts and news articles to predict the ESG readiness score. Further, as research suggests that high ESG preparedness reduces systematic risk, a secondary goal was to test the robustness of the respective ESG readiness scores based on their correlation with the companies’ stock price volatility (Beta). 

This research used a BERTopic and Top2Vec for topic modeling on ESG/sustainability reports to create a training and test data set. After training and evaluating models, two pretrained Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers models (BERT) were determined to be the most suitable – a finBERT-ESG model to classify E, S and G text followed by a pre-trained finBERT sentiment classifier to arrive at a sentiment count.  The resulting sentiment count became the input to calculate a percentile ranking of mean ESG sentiments within the peer group for the companies that were part of this evaluation.

The findings of this research were inconclusive as the calculated ESG score and volatility had little to no correlation, as would have been expected. However, the topic modeling provided relevant topics that can be used to create label data for a classification model. The pretrained finBERT sentiment model did not perform as expected on ESG data as it incorrectly classified some of the text as negative words as it contained negative words, despite it actually having a positive meaning, like “decreasing carbon.” The finBERT-ESG model did perform well in classifying E, S and G text; however, this can be improved by using a larger training data set that can be created by topic modeling.
